=head1 NAME

Marpa::Recognizer - Marpa Recognizer Objects

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=for Marpa::Display
name: Engine Synopsis Unambiguous Parse
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

    my $recce = Marpa::Recognizer->new( { grammar => $grammar } );

    my @tokens = (
        [ 'Number', 42 ],
        [ 'Multiply', ],
        [ 'Number', 1 ],
        [ 'Add', ],
        [ 'Number', 7 ],
    );

    $recce->tokens( \@tokens );

=for Marpa::Display::End

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The L<C<Marpa::Recognizer::new> constructor|/new>
creates a recognizer object from a
precomputed Marpa grammar object.
The L<C<Marpa::Recognizer::tokens>|/tokens>
method recognizes tokens.

Pedantically, recognition and evaluation are distinct things.
Recognition is determining whether there is a parse.
Evaluation is determining the value of a parse.
The
L<Marpa::Recognizer> handles both recognition and evaluation.

=head2 Location

In traditional parsing, location is position in a token stream.
This document will assume
that Marpa is using the traditional, token-stream,
model of the input,
unless it states otherwise.
Marpa supports other input models.

The B<current parse location>, or B<current earleme>,
is the location at which the next input is expected.
Intuitively, the current earleme can be thought of as
the recognizer's current position.
Alternative input models,
and the reasons for the term I<earleme> itself,
are discussed in L<the
document on alternative input models|Marpa::Advanced::Models>.

=head2 Exhaustion

Recognition may reach a point where the recognizer is exhausted.
A recognizer is B<exhausted> if there is no parse at the current location,
and if no possible additional input could
produce parses at any subsequent location.
If a recognizer is not exhausted, it is B<active>.

The evaluators look for a parse
from the parse start location
to the parse end location.
By default, the parse start location is the beginning of the input.
By default, the parse end location is the end of the input.
In other words, the default is to parse the entire input.

When an evaluator is called using the default parse end location,
the evaluator will find no parses
in an exhausted recognizer.
It may be possible for an exhausted recognizer to produce a valid parse
if the parse end location is set
to a location before the end of input.

=head1 CONSTRUCTOR

=head2 new

The C<new> method's arguments are references to hashes of named
arguments.
In each key/value pair of these hashes, the key is the argument name,
and the hash value is the value of the argument.
The C<new> method either returns a new recognizer object or throws an exception.
The named arguments are described L<in a section below|/"NAMED ARGUMENTS">.

=head1 MUTATORS

=head2 end_input

Indicates that input is finished.
Calling C<end_input> is not necessary
or useful
in the recognizer's
C<default> mode.
In C<stream> mode,
the C<end_input> method is needed to indicate the end of input.

The C<end_input> method takes no arguments.
The C<end_input> method returns a Perl true value on success.
On failure, it throws an exception.

Calling C<end_input> multiple times on the same recognizer object
is harmless,
but useless.
The second and subsequent calls will
return a Perl true,
but will have no effect.
Once C<end_input> has been called,
calls to C<tokens> on the same recognizer object
will cause an
exception to be thrown.

=head2 set

The C<set> method's arguments are references to hashes of named
arguments.
The C<set> method
can be used to set or change named arguments after the recognizer
has been created.
Details of the named arguments are L<below|/"NAMED ARGUMENTS">.

=head2 strip

The recognizer generates a considerable amount of internal data
while building tables.
These internal data are
no longer needed when input is finished
and the recognizer's tables are complete.

The C<strip> method deletes much of the recognizer's internal data,
but leaves the tables
and other data needed
for the evaluation phase.
Stripping a recognizer greatly reduces the amount of memory it uses.
Attempting to strip a recognizer before input is finished
will cause an exception.

=head2 tokens

=for Marpa::Display
name: Engine Synopsis Unambiguous Parse
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

    my @tokens = (
        [ 'Number', 42 ],
        [ 'Multiply', ],
        [ 'Number', 1 ],
        [ 'Add', ],
        [ 'Number', 7 ],
    );

    $recce->tokens( \@tokens );

=for Marpa::Display::End


The C<tokens> method takes two arguments.
The first is a reference to an array of token descriptors.
The second, optional, argument is a B<reference> to an index into that array,
used when the call is B<interactive>.

Tokens descriptors are also references to arrays.
The elements in each token descriptor are, in order:

=over

=item * Token name

Required.
Must be the name of a valid terminal symbol.
For details about terminal symbols, see L<Marpa::Grammar/"Terminals">.

=item * Token value

Optional.
Can be any Perl scalar.
If omitted, the token value is a Perl C<undef>.

=item * Token length

Optional, and
not used in the traditional, token-stream, model of the input.
Token length is
described in L<the document on alternative input
models|Marpa::Advanced::Models>.

=item * Token offset

Optional, and
not used in the traditional, token-stream, model of the input.
Token offset is
described in L<the document on alternative input
models|Marpa::Advanced::Models>.

=back

In scalar context, if the recognizer remains active,
the C<tokens> method returns the number of the current earleme.
In array context, if the recognizer remains active,
the C<tokens> method returns an array of two elements.
The first element of the returned array is the number of the current earleme.
The second element is a reference to a list of expected tokens.

The list of expected tokens returned by the C<tokens> method is used
for prediction-driven lexing.
It is an array of strings.
The strings are the names of the symbols that are
valid as token names at the current parse location.
For detail on how to use the list of expected tokens,
see L<the section on interactive
input|/"INTERACTIVE INPUT">.

When a call to the C<tokens> method in scalar context
exhausts the recognizer,
the C<tokens> method returns C<undef>.
When a call to the C<tokens> method in array context
exhausts the recognizer,
the C<tokens> method returns the empty array.

=head2 value

The value mutator evaluates and returns a parse result.
It is described in L<its own section|/"EVALUATION">.

=head1 ACCESSOR

=head2 check_terminal

Returns a Perl true when its argument is the name of a terminal symbol.
Otherwise, returns a Perl false.
Not often needed, but in special sitations a lexer may find this
the most convenient way
to determine if a symbol is a terminal.

=head2 status

The return value of the status method is that
same as that of the L</"tokens"> method.
For more details, see
L<the description of C<tokens> method|/"tokens">.

The C<status> method
can be used to check the status of the recognizer
without calling the C<tokens> method.
The C<tokens> method is the only way to
get the list of expected tokens
at earleme 0,
before the first call of the C<tokens> method.

=head1 TRACE ACCESSORS

=head2 show_earley_sets

=for Marpa::Display
name: show_earley_sets Synopsis
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

    print $recce->show_earley_sets()
        or die "print failed: $ERRNO";

=for Marpa::Display::End

Returns a multi-line string
listing every Earley item in every Earley set.
C<show_earley_sets> 
requires knowledge of Marpa internals to interpret.

For debugging grammars,
users will want to use C<show_progress> instead.
C<show_progress> contains the information
necessary for debugging grammars
and interpreting parse progress.

=head2 show_progress

=for Marpa::Display
name: show_progress Synopsis
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

    print $recce->show_progress()
        or die "print failed: $ERRNO";

=for Marpa::Display::End

Returns a string describing the progress of the parse.
With no arguments,
the string contains reports for
the last completed earleme, which is typically the one
of most interest.
With a non-negative argument I<N>,
the string contains reports for earleme I<N>.

With two numeric arguments, I<N> and I<M>, the arguments are interpreted
as a range of earlemes and the returned string contains
reports for all earlemes from I<N> to I<M>.
The first argument must be non-negative.
If the second argument is a negative integer,
"-I<M>", it indicates the I<M>th earleme from the last.
In other words,
-1 is the last earleme, -2 the next to last, etc.
The call C<< $recce->show_progress(0, -1) >>
will print progress reports for the entire parse.

C<show_progress> is
an important tool for 
debugging application grammars.
It can also be used to track the
progress of a parse or
to investigate how a parse works.
Details are in
L<the document on debugging Marpa
grammars|Marpa::Debug>.

=head1 NAMED ARGUMENTS

=head2 grammar

The C<grammar> named argument is required.  Its
value must be
a precomputed Marpa grammar object.

=head2 mode

The C<mode> named argument is optional.
If present, it must be a string, either
"C<default>" or "C<stream>".

In C<stream> mode, the C<tokens> method may be called
repeatedly.
To indicate that input is finished, it
is necessary to
call the C<end_input> method.

In C<default> mode,
only one call
to the C<tokens> method is allowed for
each recognizer object.
The input is automatically finished after that
one call.
In C<default> mode,
the C<end_input> method is not useful. 
As the name indicates,
C<default> mode is the default.

=head2 ranking_method

The value must be a string:
either "C<none>" or "C<constant>".
When the value is "C<none>", Marpa returns the parse results
in arbitrary order.
When the value is "C<constant>", Marpa allows the user
to control the order in which parse results are returned by
specifying ranking actions which assign values to rules and tokens.

The default is for parse results to be returned in arbitrary order.
For details, see L<the section on ranking in the document
on
semantics|Marpa::Semantics/"Ranking">.

=head2 too_many_earley_items

The C<too_many_earley_items> argument is optional.
If specified, it sets the B<Earley item warning threshold>.
If an Earley set becomes larger than the
Earley item warning threshold,
a warning is printed to the trace file handle.

Marpa parses from any BNF,
and can handle grammars and inputs which produce large
Earley sets.
But parsing that involves large Earley sets can be slow.
Large Earley sets
are something most applications can,
and will wish to, avoid.

By default, Marpa calculates
an Earley item warning threshold
based on the size of the
grammar.
The default threshold will never be less than 100.
If the Earley item warning threshold is set to 0,
warnings about large Earley sets are turned off.
For details about Earley sets,
see
L<the implementation document|Marpa::Advanced::Implementation>.

=head2 trace_earley_sets

A boolean.
If true, causes each Earley set to be written
to the trace file handle as it is completed.
For details about Earley sets,
see
L<the implementation document|Marpa::Advanced::Implementation>.

=head2 trace_file_handle

The value is a file handle.
Traces and warning messages
go to the trace file handle.
By default the trace file handle is inherited
from the grammar used to create the recognizer.

=head2 trace_terminals

Very handy in debugging, and often useful
even when the problem is not in the lexing.
The value is a trace level.
When the trace level is 0,
tracing of terminals is off.
This is the default.

At a trace level of 1 or higher,
Marpa traces terminals as they are accepted or rejected
by the recognizer.
At a trace level of 2 or higher,
Marpa traces the terminals expected at every
earleme.
Practical grammars often expect
a large number of different
terminals at many locations,
so the output from a trace level of 2
can be voluminous.

=head2 warnings

The value is a boolean.
Warnings are written to the trace file handle.
By default, the recognizer's warnings are on.
Usually, an application will want to leave them on.

=head1 INTERACTIVE INPUT

=for Marpa::Display
name: Engine Synopsis Interactive Parse
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

    RECCE_RESPONSE: for ( my $token_ix = 0;; ) {

        my ( $current_earleme, $expected_tokens ) =
            $recce->tokens( \@tokens, \$token_ix );

        last RECCE_RESPONSE if $token_ix > $#tokens;

        fix_things( \@tokens, $expected_tokens )
            or die q{Don't know how to fix things};

    } ## end for ( my $token_ix = 0;; )

=for Marpa::Display::End

Marpa allows prediction-driven
lexing.
In other words,
Marpa can tell the lexer
which symbols are acceptable as tokens at the next location
in the parse.
This can be very useful.

Interactive input takes place, like all input,
via the C<tokens> method.
If a call of the C<tokens> method
passes a second argument,
that call of
the C<tokens> method
is B<interactive>.
Interactive calls to the C<tokens> method
are allowed only on recognizers that
are in C<stream> mode.

In interactive input, the first argument is a reference to a B<token descriptor array>,
and the second argument is a reference to a B<token descriptor index>.
The C<tokens> method will read token descriptors starting at the token
descriptor index.
Token descriptors
before the token descriptor index are ignored.

An B<unexpected token descriptor> is a token descriptor
whose token name is not the name of one of the terminal
symbols expected at that point in the input.
The token represented by an unexpected token descriptor
is an B<unexpected token>.
In non-interactive calls to the C<tokens> method,
an unexpected token descriptor causes an exception to be thrown.

In interactive calls,
the C<tokens> method returns
leaving the 
token descriptor index pointing to
the first unexpected token descriptor.
If there were no unexpected token descriptors,
the token descriptor index will be set
to one past the end of the token descriptor array.

The behavior of the token descriptor index is designed to
facilitate loops like the one in the example above.
In that loop, the token descriptor index is initialized
to zero, and is never directly modified after that.
The loop ends when the token descriptor index points past
the end of the token descriptor array.

The return values for interactive calls to C<tokens> are the same
as the return values for non-interactive calls.
Interactive calls to C<tokens> can be made in scalar context,
but most often applications will want
to use the list of expected tokens,
which is only returned in array context.

=head2 Mixing tokens Calls

Recognizers in C<stream> mode
are very flexible.
Both interactive and
non-interactive
C<tokens> method calls can be made
to the same recognizer.
A single recognizer
can read input
from any number of token descriptor arrays.
Between calls to C<tokens>,
the application is allowed to edit the token descriptor array,
and to change the token descriptor index.

This flexiblity is possible because the recognizer is stateless
with respect to token descriptor arrays
and their token descriptor indexes.
The C<tokens> method does not keep track
of which token descriptor arrays
it has seen.
It does not keep track of which token descriptors it has already read.
It does not keep track of where the token descriptor indexes
have been in the past.
Statelessness means that,
regardless of what
an application does with its token descriptor arrays,
it is impossible to make them
inconsistent with the recognizer's internal data.

=head2 An Example

Marpa's HTML parser, L<Marpa::HTML>, is
an example of how this flexibility can help
with a non-trivial, real-life application.
When an interactive C<tokens> call returns due to
an invalid token name,
L<Marpa::HTML>
tries to fix things in two ways.

First, it looks at the expected tokens list
for the name of a token
that will work as a "virtual" token.
If L<Marpa::HTML> finds
an acceptable virtual token name,
it will create a token descriptor for it "on the fly".
In effect, 
L<Marpa::HTML> supplies
tokens that the parser wants
but which are missing in the physical input.
L<Marpa::HTML>
inserts the virtual tokens into the input
using non-interactive
C<tokens> method calls.
After inserting the virtual tokens,
L<Marpa::HTML>
loops back to the main, interactive,
C<tokens> call,
resuming the original input at the point where it left off.

Second,
under some circumstances
L<Marpa::HTML> will change the next token descriptor in the
token descriptor array to fit the parser's expectations.
L<Marpa::HTML>
then loops back to the main interactive call to C<tokens>.
When
the main interactive call to C<tokens>
resumes,
the token descriptor index is unchanged, but
points to an altered token descriptor.

=head1 EVALUATION

=for Marpa::Display
name: Engine Synopsis Unambiguous Parse
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

    my $value_ref = $recce->value;
    my $value = $value_ref ? ${$value_ref} : 'No Parse';

=for Marpa::Display::End

The C<value> method call evaluates and returns a parse result.
Its arguments are zero or more hashes of named arguments.
It returns a B<reference> to the value of the next parse result,
or undef if there are no more parse results.

These are the named arguments available to the C<value> method
call:

=head2 end

The C<value> method's
C<end> named argument
specifies the parse end location.
The default is for the parse to end where the input did,
so that the parse returned is of the entire input.

=head2 closures

The C<value> method's
C<closures> named argument
is
a reference to a hash.
In each key/value pair of this hash,
the key must be an action name.
The hash value
must be a CODE ref.

Sources of action names include

=over 

=item * The C<action> properties of rules

=item * The C<default_action> named argument of grammars

=item * The C<lhs> properties of rules

=item * The C<ranking_action> properties of rules

=item * For its C<new> method,
the C<action_object> named argument of grammars

=back

When an action name is a key in
the 
C<closures> named argument,
the usual action resolution mechanism of the semantics
is bypassed.
A common use of
the C<closures> named argument is to
allow anonymous
subroutines to be semantic actions.
For more details, see L<the document on
semantics|Marpa::Semantics>.

=head2 max_parses

The value must be an integer.
If it is greater than zero, the evaluator will
return no more than that number of parse results.
If it is zero, there will be no
limit on the number of parse results returned.
The default is for
there to be no limit.

Marpa allows extremely ambiguous grammars.
C<max_parses> 
can be used if
the user only wants to see the first few parse results of
an ambiguous parse.
C<max_parses> is also useful to
limit CPU usage and output length when testing
and debugging.

=head2 ranking_method

The value must be a string:
either "C<none>" or "C<constant>".
When the value is "C<none>", Marpa returns the parse results
in arbitrary order.
When the value is "C<constant>", Marpa allows the user
to control the order in which parse results are returned by
specifying ranking actions.
The default is for parse results to be returned in arbitrary order.
For details, see L<the section on parse order in the semantics
document|Marpa::Semantics/"PARSE ORDER">.

=head2 trace_actions

The C<value> method's
C<trace_actions> named argument
is a boolean.
If the boolean value is true, Marpa traces the resolution of action names to
Perl closures.
A boolean value of false turns tracing off, which is the default.
Traces are written to the trace file handle.

=head2 trace_values

The C<value> method's
C<trace_values> named argument
is a numeric trace level.
If the numeric trace level is 1, Marpa
traces values as they are computed in the evaluation stack.
A trace level of 0 turns value tracing off,
which is the default.
Traces are written to the trace file handle.

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2007-2010 Jeffrey Kegler, all rights reserved.
Marpa is free software under the Perl license.
For details see the LICENSE file in the Marpa distribution.

=cut

# Local Variables:
#   mode: cperl
#   cperl-indent-level: 4
#   fill-column: 100
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
