=head1 NAME

Marpa::Tracing - Tracing Your Grammar

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document is an overview of
the techniques for tracing and
debugging Marpa parses and grammars.

=head1 BASIC TECHNIQUES

=head2 Check the Input Location Where Parsing Failed

If parsing failed in the recognizer,
look at the input location where it happened.
Compare the input against the grammar.
This step is fairly obvious,
but I include it because
even experts (actually, especially experts)
will sometimes overlook the obvious
in a rush to use more advanced techniques.

=head2 Turn on Warnings

Make sure that 
Marpa's C<warnings> named arguments
for both the grammar and the recognizer
are turned on.
The C<warnings> named arguments are
on by default.

=head2 Turn off Stripping

When Marpa "strips" its objects,
it removes data that is not
needed for subsequent processing.
This saves time and memory, but data that is not
needed for processing
can be extremely valuable for debugging.
When objects are stripped,
many of Marpa's tracing methods will return
partial information or no information at all.

You should turn off Marpa's C<strip> named argument to the grammar.
Grammar stripping is on by default.
If you are
using the
L<recognizer's C<strip> method|Marpa::Recognizer/"strip">
to strip the recognizer,
stop doing that.

=head2 Trace Terminals

Turn on the C<trace_terminals> recognizer named argument.
This tells you which tokens the recognizer is looking for and which ones it thinks it found.
If the problem is in lexing, C<trace_terminals> tells you the whole story.

Even if the problem is not in the lexing,
tracing terminals can tell you a lot.
Marpa uses prediction-driven lexing.
At any given parse location,
Marpa is only looking
for those tokens that it thinks
could result in a successful parse.
That means that the list of
tokens that the recognizer is looking for
tells you where
the recognizer thinks it is.

=head2 Trace Progress

Tracing the recognizer's progress
with
C<show_progress>
is most powerful tool available
in the basic toolkit.
C<show_progress>
should provide all the
information necessary to
debug an application's grammar.
L<A separate document|Marpa::Debug>
explains how to interpret the progress reports.
That document includes an
example of the use of C<show_progress>
to debug an error in a grammar.

=head2 Double Check Rules and Symbols

It sometimes helps to look carefully at the output of
C<show_rules> and C<show_symbols>.
Check if anything there is
not what you expected.

=head2 Other Traces

C<trace_actions> will show you how action names resolve to semantic
Perl closures.
Setting the C<trace_values> evaluator named argument to a trace level of 1
traces the values of the parse tree nodes as they are pushed on, and 
popped off, the evaluation stack.

=head2 Basic Checklist

A full investigation of a parse
includes the following:

=over 4

=item * Make sure the C<warnings> option is turned on.  It is on by default.

=item * Turn off the C<strip> Marpa named argument.  By default, it is on.

=item * Make sure you're not stripping the recognizer.

=item * Turn on the C<trace_terminals> recognizer named argument.

=item * Run C<show_symbols> on the precomputed grammar.

=item * Run C<show_rules> on the precomputed grammar.

=item * Run C<show_progress> on the recognizer.

=item * Turn on the C<trace_actions> evaluator named argument.

=item * Set the C<trace_values> evaluator named argument to level 1.

=back

When considering how much tracing to turn on,
remember that if the input text to the grammar is large,
the outputs from C<show_earley_sets>,
C<trace_terminals>,
C<show_progress>,
and C<trace_values>
will be very lengthy.
You want to work with short inputs if at all possible.

=head1 ADVANCED TECHNIQUES

Most users can skip this section.
Marpa's advanced traces should not be necessary for debugging application
grammars.
They are documented for those
who want to delve into
internals.

Marpa's internals are described in 
the L<implementation document|Marpa::Advanced::Implementation>.
The internal traces are
L<C<Marpa::Recognizer::show_earley_sets>
|Marpa::Recognizer/"show_earley_sets">,
and L<C<Marpa::Grammar::show_AHFA>
|Marpa::Grammar/"show_AHFA">.
The L<implementation document|Marpa::Advanced::Implementation>
has example outputs from
the
C<show_earley_sets> and
C<show_AHFA>
methods,
and explains how to read them.

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2007-2010 Jeffrey Kegler, all rights reserved.
Marpa is free software under the Perl license.
For details see the LICENSE file in the Marpa distribution.

=cut

